

===== PAGE 1 =====
 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Internet of Things
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/iot  
Research article
Blockchain-based federated learning with homomorphic encryption 
for privacy-preserving healthcare data sharing
Muhammad Firdaus a,c,f
 , Harashta Tatimma Larasati d,e
 , Kyung Hyune-Rhee b
 ,∗
a Industrial Science Technology Research Center, Pukyong National University, Busan, 48513, Republic  of Korea
b Division of Computer Engineering and AI, Pukyong National University, Busan, 48513, Republic  of Korea
c School of Computing, Telkom University, Bandung, 40132, Indonesia
d School of Electrical Engineering and Informatics, Institut Teknologi Bandung, Bandung, 40257, Indonesia
e Department of Scientific Computing, Pukyong National University, Busan, 48513, Republic  of Korea
f Department of Intelligence Computing, Dong-Eui University, Busan, 47340, Republic  of Korea
A R T I C L E  I N F O
Keywords:
Healthcare
Privacy-preserving
Homomorphic encryption
Blockchain
Federated learning
 A B S T R A C T
Healthcare data is often fragmented across various institutions due to its highly sensitive 
and private nature. In this sense, hospitals and clinics maintain electronic health records 
(EHRs) independently; hence, valuable data is siloed within individual organizations, preventing 
comprehensive analysis that could benefit from diverse data sources. Federated learning (FL) 
addresses these challenges by enabling the training of a shared global model using data 
distributed across multiple institutions without moving the data from its source. By leveraging 
FL, healthcare institutions can combine their data assets to improve predictive analytics, 
personalized medicine, and overall healthcare outcomes, ultimately benefiting patients and 
the healthcare system. However, the current FL model with a central server presents several 
challenges within healthcare, including the risk of malicious attacks, regulatory compliance, and 
privacy vulnerabilities. To overcome these issues, this paper introduces the FL framework with 
blockchain and homomorphic encryption (HE). Our framework aims to minimize the role of the 
central server, enable collaborative model training across healthcare organizations, and enhance 
data security and privacy. In this sense, blockchain ensures the integrity and transparency of the 
process, while homomorphic encryption ensures that the data remains private. This framework 
can potentially enable institutions to enrich medical knowledge while securely keeping patient 
data collaboratively and facilitating healthcare analytics in practical settings.
1. Introduction
In recent years, the availability of healthcare data from various sources, like clinical institutions, pharmaceutical industries, and 
insurance companies, has surged [1]. It offers opportunities to develop data-driven analytics to improve the quality of the healthcare 
system. However, healthcare data is often fragmented due to its highly sensitive and private nature. Different hospitals and 
institutions typically only have access to their own patient records through electronic health records (EHRs). These records contain 
sensitive protected health information (PHI), regulated by stringent laws such as the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability 
Act (HIPAA) [2]. This fragmentation and regulation pose significant challenges for advanced healthcare data analytics, which require 
enormous amounts of training data to be used. As a result, valuable data is isolated within individual organizations, limiting the 
ability to conduct thorough analysis that could leverage data from multiple sources.
∗ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: khrhee@pknu.ac.kr (K. Hyune-Rhee).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iot.2025.101579
Received 8 October 2024; Received in revised form 15 March 2025; Accepted 15 March 2025
Internet of Things 31 (2025) 101579 
Available online 23 March 2025 
2542-6605/© 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license 
( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ). 

===== PAGE 2 =====
M. Firdaus et al.
To address these challenges, federated learning (FL) has gained popularity in healthcare for its ability to train shared global 
models while keeping data within local institutions, thus enhancing data security and privacy [3]. Unlike traditional machine 
learning (ML) methods, FL transmits trained models instead of raw data, enabling collaborative model training without exposing 
sensitive information. In this sense, healthcare institutions can combine their data assets to improve overall healthcare outcomes, 
ultimately benefiting patients and the healthcare system. Moreover, the FL approach aligns with stringent data privacy regulations 
like HIPAA, making it ideal for advancing predictive diagnostics, personalized medicine, medical research, and healthcare analytics. 
Thus, FL facilitates innovation in improving care delivery, as well as overcomes data fragmentation and regulatory challenges.
Despite its benefits, the existing FL model with a centralized server poses several challenges within healthcare [4]. These 
challenges include the risk of malicious attacks, regulatory compliance, and privacy vulnerabilities. Moreover, FL’s reliance on 
a central server for model aggregation introduces a single point of failure, raising concerns about data security and privacy. Hostile 
users may exploit this vulnerability to conduct various attacks, such as membership inference and poisoning attacks, which can 
compromise the development of the global model and undermine overall system security and effectiveness [5]. Consequently, 
healthcare entities may hesitate to participate in collaborative FL training due to these concerns. Therefore, addressing these 
challenges is essential to fully harnessing FL’s potential in healthcare and ensuring the security and privacy of sensitive patient 
data.
Several privacy-preserving techniques have been proposed to address these challenges. Secure aggregation ensures that the server 
only learns aggregated updates rather than individual client updates [6]. However, it still allows access to aggregated gradients, 
which can leak information about the underlying model. Differential privacy (DP) is another commonly used technique in FL that 
enhances security by adding noise to model updates, thereby protecting individual data [7]. While DP can be easily integrated 
and implemented, it suffers from weaker privacy guarantees, which can lead to accuracy degradation. Additionally, DP exposes 
raw gradients to the central server, potentially leading to privacy breaches [8]. Secure multi-party computation (MPC) enables 
multiple clients to collaboratively compute a function over their private data without revealing it. However, MPC requires complex 
synchronization protocols and significant computational overhead, making it inefficient for geo-distributed FL [9].
Motivated by the challenges and concerns mentioned above, this paper introduces the FL framework enhanced with blockchain 
and homomorphic encryption (HE). Our framework aims to minimize the role of the central server, enable collaborative model 
training across healthcare organizations, and strengthen data security and privacy. HE facilitates encrypted gradient aggregation, 
ensuring that the central server never has access to raw model updates. Unlike existing approaches (such as secure aggregation [6], 
DP [7], and MPC [9]), HE offers strong privacy guarantees without compromising learning accuracy and can be integrated into 
existing FL frameworks. In this context, HE protects data privacy by allowing multiple participants, such as healthcare entities, to 
engage in collaborative FL model training while keeping their data encrypted. Additionally, blockchain provides decentralized trust, 
transparency, and immutability, removing the need for a trusted central authority and preventing data manipulation. Blockchain 
technology also ensures process integrity and transparency by recording all transactions on a distributed ledger. Furthermore, it can 
establish a decentralized incentive system to promote participation in collaborative training among healthcare institutions. In short, 
the combination of HE and blockchain ensures secure, verifiable, and tamper-resistant FL training, making our framework more 
robust than current methods. Ultimately, this framework has the potential to transform healthcare analytics by enabling collaborative 
institutions to improve medical knowledge while securely handling patient data.
The structure of this paper unfolds as follows: Section 2 offers a brief background on homomorphic encryption, blockchain 
technology, and federated learning, laying the foundation for understanding our proposed approach. Section 3 reviews related 
works. In Section 4, we present our concept designed to address security and privacy challenges in healthcare systems. Section 5 
analyzes the numerical results obtained from simulations conducted to evaluate the efficacy of our framework. Lastly, Section 6 
concludes the paper.
2. Preliminaries
2.1. Traditional healthcare data sharing
As technology progresses, there has been a surge in the amount of digital data as it has become easier to digitize various kinds 
of information, including the medical-related data in healthcare field. This has brought forward a new opportunity to process 
and analyze the data through myriad data analytics methods, including various machine learning techniques, which can be a 
catalyst in generating insights and potentially enhance the quality of the overall healthcare outcome —such as through improved 
predictive analytics, personalized medicine, more effective management, and even contributing to various findings, e.g., of more 
potent medication, more proper treatments, or even breakthrough discoveries.
However, due to the highly sensitive and private nature of healthcare data such as patients’ records, care providers (e.g., hospitals 
and clinics) manage these data privately within their organization, i.e., in a silo approach. This is to preserve the anonymity of 
individual patients, which should be maintained in the highest possible standard [10]. On the other hand, as data availability 
through sharing has now been regarded as essential in enhancing the clinical treatments and medical research [11], there has 
also been a paradigm shift in the medical-related research towards collaboration between multiple institutions, but required to be 
conducted in a very strict manner to comply with the data privacy and protection laws. This has its own shortcoming since different 
regions and institutions may have its own regulations, potentially results in data law conflict that are difficult to resolve, which 
even more hinder the full potential of data utility across different institutions.
Internet of Things 31 (2025) 101579 
2 

===== PAGE 3 =====
M. Firdaus et al.
Legacy approach resorts to bespoke data sharing contracts which often requires lengthy administration process, further reducing 
efficiency and deterring the collaboration initiatives [12]. This is unfortunate considering the potential of collaboration to obtain 
much more diverse data may promote expedition of data analysis and more accurate results, which in turn, benefit patients, and 
the overall healthcare system, and health-related science in general. In contrast, global collaboration and extensive data sharing 
may be highly beneficial in advancing the medical fields, such as research in critical illness or rare diseases with unknown cures, 
e.g., previously COVID-19, HIV/AIDS, early detection of cancer, brain tumors, to mention a few.
In addition, at the case where collaboration can be conducted via the bespoke contracts, traditional data sharing approaches 
often relies on conventional anonymization techniques such as by suppressing directly identifying attributes or by generalizing, 
aggregating, or randomizing quasi-identifying attributes in individual patient records [12], which is at risk due to the increasing 
threat of reidentification attacks from anonymized data [12–15].
2.2. Homomorphic encryption
Homomorphic encryption (HE) is one type of encryption scheme that enables arithmetic operations to be performed directly on 
encrypted data or ciphertext without the need for decryption in advance. Computed outputs are likewise encrypted, with identical (or 
almost identical) results upon decryption, meaning that this scheme enables data processing without revealing the actual data [16]. 
This brings substantial implications as it allows third-party services (e.g., cloud computing services, cloud applications for data 
sharing and collaboration, and privacy-preserving ML services [17]) to offer more services to users without requiring to reveal 
users’ sensitive information that compromises their privacy —a capability not satisfactorily offered by conventional encryption 
techniques [18].
An encryption technique is considered as homomorphic through an operation ‘‘⊛’’ if it satisfies Eq.  (1), where 𝐸 denotes the 
encryption algorithm while 𝑀 denotes the set of all possible messages [18]. 
𝐸(𝑚1) ⊛ 𝐸(𝑚2) = 𝐸(𝑚1 ⊛ 𝑚2), ∀𝑚1, 𝑚2 ∈ 𝑀 (1)
Meanwhile, the HE property is described by Eq.  (2), with 𝐸𝑛𝑐 and 𝐷𝑒𝑐 denoting encryption and decryption, respectively, and 
𝑓 () is a function applied on actual values (i.e., the cleartexts) 𝑎 and 𝑏 using encryption key 𝑝𝑘 [16]. 
𝑓 (𝑎, 𝑏) = 𝐷𝑒𝑐(𝐸𝑛𝑐 (𝑝𝑘, 𝑎), 𝐸𝑛𝑐(𝑝𝑘, 𝑏)) (2)
Generally, HE schemes in literature can be classified under three types of schemes based on the number of allowed operations 
on the encrypted data [17,18]:
1. Partially Homomorphic Encryption (PHE): supports a single type of operation (i.e., only additions or only multiplications) 
for an unlimited number of times, meaning that there is no bound on the number of usages.
2. Somewhat Homomorphic Encryption (SWHE): permits both operations, but only for a limited number of times.
3. Fully Homomorphic Encryption (FHE) enables an unlimited number of operations to be performed an unlimited number of 
times.
2.3. Blockchain: Distributed ledger technology
In a nutshell, blockchain technology is a decentralized and distributed ledger system that eliminates the need for centralized 
management. Instead, it relies on a network of nodes working together to securely and immutably record transactions [19]. This 
decentralized approach minimizes the need for intermediaries, enhances transparency, and uses cryptographic methods to improve 
data security [20]. Originally designed to support cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin [21], blockchain technology has evolved into a 
promising solution for various industries due to its prominent features. Beyond its initial use for Bitcoin, blockchain has gained 
significant attention in sectors such as supply chain management, finance and banking, healthcare, and government. In these areas, 
it offers a reliable environment, enhances data security, and has the potential to reform data management [22].
A blockchain, as illustrated in Fig.  1, consists of the structure of a chain linked by hashes. Using Bitcoin as an instance, each 
block comprises two main parts, i.e., a header and a body. The block header contains essential metadata about the block and is 
composed of several components, including the difficulty value, the Merkle root, a timestamp, the hash of the previous block (parent 
hash), the version number, and nonce. Meanwhile, the block body comprises the actual data being recorded on the blockchain and 
consists of the number of transactions included in the block (i.e., transaction count), as well as the individual transactions from users, 
which are stored in a Merkle tree structure [24]. Together, these elements form a robust and secure structure. The block header 
summarizes the block’s contents and ensures each block is cryptographically linked to the previous block, creating a continuous 
chain. The block body holds the transaction data, which can be efficiently verified and traced back to its source through the hash 
pointer in the header, whereas the timestamp ensures the blocks’ correct order. Additionally, to secure data access and transmission, 
blockchain uses a consensus algorithm maintained by all nodes to generate and update data. Consequently, this design ensures data 
integrity, security, and transparency.
2.4. Federated learning
The Google AI team introduced Federated Learning [25] as a new communication-efficient optimization algorithm to address 
the challenges of the classical ML approach, particularly data privacy and communication efficiency. In traditional ML, the  server 
Internet of Things 31 (2025) 101579 
3 

===== PAGE 4 =====
M. Firdaus et al.
Fig. 1. Blockchain structure [23].
consistently handles model training, performing both data training and aggregation in a centralized manner, where data is collected 
and processed on a central server. In contrast, FL allows model training to occur directly on devices, such as smartphones or IoT 
devices, without requiring raw data to be uploaded to a central server. In this sense, users only send the essential information 
needed to update learning objectives while keeping sensitive data locally [26]. By keeping sensitive user data on local devices, FL 
significantly mitigates privacy concerns by preventing certain attacks that attempt to gain unauthorized access to local training data, 
making it particularly valuable in sensitive fields such as healthcare and finance [27]. Thus, due to its advantages, FL has been 
applied in various learning domains and applications, including next-word prediction [28], enhancing vocabulary and language 
models [29], developing predictive models for patient care [30], and facilitating low-latency vehicle-to-vehicle communication for 
autonomous driving [31].
3. Related works
In the context of the existing healthcare environment, multiple challenges frequently deter the exchange of information and 
seamless collaboration among healthcare institutions and stakeholders. This is understandable considering the inherently sensitive 
nature of healthcare data results in the paramount concerns of data privacy and security [22]. The need to comply with safeguarding-
yet-complicated personal data regulatory frameworks, including the ones specific to healthcare (e.g., HIPAA of the United States [2], 
The Health Records Act (HRA) of Australia, and Health Information Privacy Code of New Zealand), further augment the intricacy 
of data-sharing initiatives. The concept of FL was introduced as one of the possible solutions to resolve the challenges while 
navigating through the requirement of healthcare data protection. FL offers a viable method for medical institutions to collaborate 
and share insights derived from Electronic Health Record (EHR) data, while maintaining data privacy by not directly sharing the 
data itself [32].
In recent years, there have been several works in the literature that proposed employing HE (and its variant) for a more secure 
FL, e.g., [16,17,33–35]. In [17], the authors proposed to utilize FHE to alleviate privacy and security concerns of FL over insecure 
communication channels for the use case of IoT-enabled smart city communications. In particular, the authors proposed a flexible 
design of FL and FHE combination which is adaptable to different IoT environments, with four distinct scenarios which are then 
examined as a proof-of-concept (PoC) of the work. These four scenarios are then evaluated against an IoT dataset benchmark in 
terms of their security and efficiency, which show improvements around 80.15 to 89.98% in terms of communication overhead 
compared to the baseline scenario. In [33], the authors proposed a multiparty privacy-preserving ML framework entitled PFMLP 
based on PHE and FL to perform ML tasks without revealing sensitive data. To enhance the efficiency of their technique over the 
standard HE which induces relatively high computational overhead (e.g., additional overhead in encryption and decryption during 
training), they proposed to employ the improved Pailier algorithm, yielding an increase in the training speed of 25%–28%.
Related to the healthcare sector, in [16], the authors proposed the use of HE and FL to perform a privacy-preserving ML task 
in medical data to safeguard against adversarial attack by establishing a secure multiparty computation protocol. In particular, the 
authors employ the method in the training of Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) for the use case of COVID-19 detection with 
real-world dataset and evaluate their method based on its performance, showing a comparative performance in terms of accuracy, F1 
score, precision, and recall. Note that they observe the considerable tradeoff for the number of clients and the execution time. In [36], 
the authors introduced a homomorphic outsourcing computing toolkit for secure predictive computation, utilizing the Paillier 
encryption system and Lagrange interpolation to perform basic operations and encrypted comparisons. Similarly, [37] proposed 
comparable homomorphic encryption (CompHE) schemes that enable efficient ciphertext comparison among multiple users using 
Lagrange’s interpolation technique, enhancing security through collusion resistance in the semi-honest model while requiring fewer 
modular exponentiations for comparison. These schemes also demonstrate applications in privacy-preserving COVID-19 contact 
tracing and social distance control. In [38], the authors proposed a secure data fitting scheme for medical IoT based on the CKKS 
Internet of Things 31 (2025) 101579 
4 

===== PAGE 5 =====
M. Firdaus et al.
Table 1
Summary of notations.
 Notations Descriptions  
 𝐻 Number of users (i.e., hospitals), 𝐻 = {ℎ1, ℎ2, ℎ3, … , ℎ𝑛}  
 𝐶 Number of clusters, 𝐶 = {𝐶1, 𝐶2, 𝐶3, … , 𝐶𝑛}  
 𝐸 Number of edge servers, 𝐸 = {𝐸1, 𝐸2, 𝐸3, … , 𝐸𝑛}  
 𝜓 𝑖𝑛 The initial parameters of the global model  
 𝑘𝑒𝑦𝑝𝑘
𝐸 , 𝑘𝑒𝑦𝑠𝑘
𝐸 Public–private key pairs of edge servers  
 𝑘𝑒𝑦𝑝𝑘
ℎ , 𝑘𝑒𝑦𝑠𝑘
ℎ Public–private key pairs of participating hospitals  
 𝐷 Local datasets, 𝐷𝑖 = {𝐷1, 𝐷2, 𝐷3, … , 𝐷𝑛}  
 𝑡 Number of iteration  
 𝛿 The similarity of hospitals’ data distribution  
 𝜃∗
𝑖 The stationary solution of hospital 𝑖  
 𝜓 𝑡
ℎ The trained local model  
 ▽𝐹ℎ(𝜓) The average of model parameters update  
 𝐸𝑛𝑐 _𝐻𝐸 (𝜓 𝑡
ℎ) The encrypted local model with homomorphic encryption 
 𝜓 𝑡
𝑔𝑏𝑙 The new global model for the next iteration 𝑡 + 1  
 𝐸𝑛𝑐 (𝜓 𝑡
ℎ) The encryption function of 𝜓 𝑡
ℎ  
 𝐷𝑒𝑐(𝜓 𝑡
𝑔𝑏𝑙 ) The decryption function of 𝜓 𝑡
𝑔𝑏𝑙  
 𝑅𝑡
ℎ Rewards of contribution for participating hospitals  
homomorphic encryption algorithm, which encrypts the KAGGLE-HDP Heart Disease Prediction dataset and calculates the data’s 
weight and deviation using gradient descent. The scheme achieves a recognition accuracy of 96.7%, offering high accuracy and 
improved privacy protection. Additionally, the authors of [35] presented an FL-PHE combination within a distributed data fabric 
architecture to establish a secure medical image analysis that complies with data protection and privacy laws, enabling multiple 
clients (e.g., hospitals and medical data centers) to collaborate in training a machine-learning model without exchanging raw data, 
thus not requiring centralized repository. The effectiveness of their method are tested on the use case of pituitary tumor classification, 
which yields an accuracy of 83.31%.
In terms of the integration of blockchain to the FL-HE itself, Wang et al. [39] proposed BPFL, a FL-HE scheme leveraging 
consortium blockchain as its underlying distributed framework for the case of the Internet of Vehicle (IoV). In particular, the authors 
improve the existing aggregation rules called Multi-Krum and combine it with HE to achieve ciphertext-level model aggregation 
and filtering to enable the verifiability of the local models while being privacy-preserved. Further, for the blockchain side, they also 
develop a reputation-based incentive mechanism to encourage users in IoV to actively and honestly participate in the FL scheme. 
On the other hand, the work from [40] proposed a FL approach combining blockchain, HE, and reputation mechanisms to ensure 
privacy and security in distributed data interactions. Edge nodes train ciphertext models using HE, with contributions evaluated 
through a reputation system and verified on the blockchain. This approach incentivizes participation, protects data privacy, and 
addresses security risks, while a joint aggregation and optimization algorithm enhances learning accuracy and performance.
4. Proposed scheme
This research aims to present a secure FL approach by utilizing HE and blockchain to tackle security and privacy concerns in 
the healthcare system. Our scheme employs a cross-silo FL setting, which is suitable for healthcare applications where participants, 
such as hospitals, are consistently available to contribute to collaborative training in each round of computation. Blockchain ensures 
process integrity and transparency by recording all transactions in its distributed ledger and provides a decentralized incentive 
mechanism to encourage participation in collaborative training among healthcare institutions [41]. Meanwhile, HE safeguards data 
privacy by allowing multiple participants, such as healthcare entities, to engage in collaborative FL model training while keeping 
their data encrypted. Table  1 shows the summary of notations used in this paper.
4.1. System entities and components
Before presenting the design architecture, we provide definitions of the relevant terms used in this paper.
(i) Users: The users consist of participating medical institutions (i.e., hospitals in our case) that possess large amounts of raw 
medical data. In this setup, hospitals act as data providers, where they perform local model training using their own data. 
Additionally, encryption is conducted locally by the users before the data is uploaded to the edge server.
(ii) Local datasets: The data is stored and processed locally at each participating hospital. Unlike traditional centralized ML, our 
approach maintains data in a decentralized manner. Each hospital utilizes its own local dataset to train a model locally, which 
enhances privacy and security by ensuring that the raw medical data, which contains sensitive information, never leaves the 
local hospital environment.
(iii) Sensitive information: FL aims to protect sensitive information by ensuring that this data never leaves the local entity 
(i.e., hospitals) to minimize the risk of data breaches or unauthorized access. In the context of healthcare data sharing, 
sensitive information includes personally identifiable information (PII) and PHI such as names, addresses, medical records, 
diagnoses, treatment histories, genetic data, and any other health-related details.
Internet of Things 31 (2025) 101579 
5 

===== PAGE 6 =====
M. Firdaus et al.
Fig. 2. Proposed model.
(iv) Trained local model: Refers to a FL model that has been trained using data stored locally within hospitals. In this process, 
each hospital sends only the trained model’s parameters to an edge server, where these updates are aggregated to create an 
enhanced global model.
(v) Clusters: The hospitals are grouped into clusters to minimize communication overhead between the users and the edge 
server. Additionally, clustering participating hospitals based on geographic proximity, network conditions, or data distribution 
can reduce computational load and improve system performance. It is worth noting that each cluster is equipped with a 
blockchain-based edge server to collect the trained local models from the hospitals.
(vi) Edge servers: The edge server is assigned to gather the trained local models submitted by hospitals and perform secure 
model aggregation. Additionally, edge servers facilitate local storage, communication, and processing capabilities and reduce 
communication and computation costs by enabling computational tasks to be performed closer to the hospitals, which act 
as data providers. In this setup, blockchain is utilized to establish distributed edge servers, ensuring the authenticity and 
integrity of transactions in healthcare data sharing, and facilitating decentralized reward mechanism.
(vii) Global model: After training, each hospital sends only the updated parameters of its local model to the edge server within 
its cluster. The edge server then aggregates these updates to create the new global model. By leveraging homomorphic 
encryption, our approach allows the aggregation of encrypted local model updates without needing to decrypt them, thereby 
enhancing privacy and security in the system.
(viii) Trusted authority (TA): A trusted third party that responsible for initializing various security parameters, including generating 
and managing cryptographic keys. These keys are used to encrypt model updates exchanged between hospitals and the 
blockchain-based edge server. Additionally, the trusted authority authenticates the hospitals’ identities to ensure that only 
legitimate and authorized hospitals can participate in the training process.
4.2. Design architecture and procedures
4.2.1. System initialization
Firstly, the initial set of model parameters (such as weights and biases for a neural network) is generated. The initial parameters 
of global model (𝜓 𝑖𝑛) are chosen based on the model architecture and the specific requirements of the application (e.g., a healthcare 
prediction model). Then, 𝜓 𝑖𝑛 are stored on distributed edge servers using blockchain smart contracts and shared with all participating 
Internet of Things 31 (2025) 101579 
6 

===== PAGE 7 =====
M. Firdaus et al.
hospitals. Here, only authorized hospitals are permitted to join the system and download the initial model to participate in 
collaborative healthcare data sharing. The TA generates public and private key pairs (𝑘𝑒𝑦𝑝𝑘
𝐸 , 𝑘𝑒𝑦𝑠𝑘
𝐸 ) for blockchain-based edge servers 
to use in the data-sharing process. Similarly, hospitals are required to generate their own public and private key pairs (𝑘𝑒𝑦𝑝𝑘
ℎ , 𝑘𝑒𝑦𝑠𝑘
ℎ ), 
which will be used to encrypt model updates. Furthermore, by employing a consortium blockchain, the edge servers are preselected 
and trusted, thereby enhancing the overall security and reliability of the system.
As illustrated in Fig.  2, we organize the set of users (i.e., hospitals) 𝐻 = {ℎ1, ℎ2, ℎ3, … , ℎ𝑛} into clusters 𝐶 = {𝐶1, 𝐶2, 𝐶3, … , 𝐶𝑛}, 
with each cluster equipped with blockchain-based edge servers 𝐸 = { 𝐸1, 𝐸2, 𝐸3, … , 𝐸𝑛}. In this context, the clustering mechanism 
is performed based on the similarity (𝛿) of the hospitals’ data distribution using the cosine similarity technique [42], as follows: 
𝛿ℎ𝑖,ℎ𝑗 ∶= 𝛿(𝜃∗
𝑖 , 𝜃∗
𝑗 ) ∶=
(𝜃∗
𝑖 , 𝜃∗
𝑗 )
‖‖‖𝜃∗
𝑖
‖‖‖
‖‖‖𝜃∗
𝑗
‖‖‖
(3)
𝐶𝑖, 𝐶𝑗 ← arg min
𝐶𝑖∪𝐶𝑗
(max 𝛿𝐶𝑖,𝐶𝑗 ) (4)
where 𝜃∗
𝑖 , 𝜃∗
𝑗 represent the stationary solution [42] of hospital 𝑖 dan 𝑗. The system then separates the hospitals into groups such that 
the maximum similarity between hospitals from different clusters is minimized (see Eq.  (4)). This approach effectively partitions 
the hospitals into groups that are more similar to each other.
4.2.2. Local model training and uploading
In every iteration 𝑡, each hospital ℎ𝑖 downloads the global model 𝜓 𝑡 and trains it locally using their dataset 𝐷𝑖 = {𝐷1, 𝐷2, 𝐷3, … ,
𝐷𝑛}. Here, 𝐷𝑖 is not shared with other 𝐻, where 𝐷𝑖 ∪ 𝐷𝑗 = 𝜙, ∀𝑖 ≠ 𝑗, where 𝑖, 𝑗 ∈ 𝐻. The training local models are computed as 
follows: 
𝜓 𝑡
ℎ = 𝜓 𝑡 − 𝜂ℎ▽𝐹ℎ(𝜓) (5)
𝐹ℎ(𝜓) = 1
𝑛ℎ
∑
𝑥𝑖∈𝐷𝑖
𝑓𝑖(𝜓) (6)
where 𝑛ℎ is the total samples of ℎ, 𝑓𝑖 is a loss function for 𝑖th data point of ℎ (𝑥(𝑖)
𝑝 , 𝑦(𝑖)
𝑝 ), ▽𝐹ℎ(𝜓) is the average of model parameters 
update, and 𝜂ℎ is learning rate. After training, hospitals obtain local model updates 𝜓 𝑡
ℎ and then encrypt them using HE and their 
public keys to ensure data privacy, as follows: 
𝐸𝑛𝑐 _𝐻𝐸 (𝜓 𝑡
ℎ) = 𝐸𝑛𝑐 (𝜓 𝑡
ℎ, 𝑘𝑒𝑦𝑝𝑘
ℎ ) (7)
The encrypted local models 𝐸𝑛𝑐 _𝐻𝐸 (𝜓 𝑡
ℎ) are then uploaded to the cluster edge server 𝐸𝑖. Each hospital’s model update is recorded 
as a transaction on the blockchain with hash function ℎ𝑎𝑠ℎ{𝐸𝑛𝑐 _𝐻𝐸 (𝜓 𝑡
ℎ1
), 𝐸𝑛𝑐_𝐻𝐸 (𝜓 𝑡
ℎ2
), … , 𝐸𝑛𝑐_𝐻𝐸 (𝜓 𝑡
ℎ𝑛)}, where transactions are 
validated by network nodes (i.e., distributed edge servers) 𝐸1, 𝐸2, 𝐸3, … , 𝐸𝑛. It is worth noting that our system verifies performance 
by assessing the prediction accuracy of the trained local model [43] before proceeding with the model aggregation process. 
Therefore, only verified 𝐸𝑛𝑐 _𝐻𝐸 (𝜓 𝑡
ℎ) will be aggregated and stored for contribution assessment in the blockchain network. 
𝐸𝑖 ← ℎ𝑎𝑠ℎ{𝐸𝑛𝑐 _𝐻𝐸 (𝜓 𝑡
ℎ1
), 𝐸𝑛𝑐_𝐻𝐸 (𝜓 𝑡
ℎ2
), … , 𝐸𝑛𝑐_𝐻𝐸 (𝜓 𝑡
ℎ𝑛)} (8)
4.2.3. Model aggregation
After the local model training process, the blockchain-based edge servers 𝐸𝑖 receive encrypted model updates 𝐸𝑛𝑐 _𝐻𝐸 (𝜓 𝑡
ℎ) from 
their assigned clusters 𝐶𝑖 of participating hospitals and perform model aggregation. 𝐸𝑖 provide local computation capabilities to 
perform the aggregation tasks based on homomorphic encryption technique. Then, 𝐸𝑖 aggregate the model updates by averaging 
𝐸𝑛𝑐 _𝐻𝐸 (𝜓 𝑡
ℎ) from all participating hospitals to generate the new global model through the following equation: 
𝜓 𝑡
𝑔𝑏𝑙 =
𝐻∑
ℎ=1
𝑛ℎ
𝑁 𝐸𝑛𝑐 _𝐻𝐸 (𝜓 𝑡
ℎ) (9)
where 𝑁 represents the overall number of data points (samples). Since the model updates are encrypted, the edge server does 
not have access to the raw data or the specific details of the model updates; it only aggregates the encrypted updates. By using 
homomorphic encryption as a secure aggregation technique, the edge server can aggregate model updates without decrypting them.
Furthermore, the new global model 𝜓 𝑡
𝑔𝑏𝑙 is shared with all distributed edge servers 𝐸𝑖 in the blockchain network. The distributed 
nature of the edge servers helps mitigate the risk of single points of failure, thereby enhancing the overall security of the FL 
framework. As a result, participating hospitals can download and decrypt the new global model, 𝑑𝑒𝑐 (𝜓 𝑡
𝑔𝑏𝑙 ), for the next round of 
local training at iteration (𝑡 + 1).
Internet of Things 31 (2025) 101579 
7 

===== PAGE 8 =====
M. Firdaus et al.
Algorithm 1 A detailed of the proposed scheme. 𝑡 is number of iteration; 𝐻 number of hospitals ℎ𝑛; 𝐸 number of edge servers 𝐸𝑛; 
𝐷𝑖 is the local datasets; 𝐸𝑝 is the number of local epochs; and 𝜂 is learning rate.
1: procedure EdgeServer:
2:  𝐸𝑖 initialize 𝜓 𝑖𝑛
3:  𝐸, 𝐻 ← (𝑘𝑒𝑦𝑝𝑘
𝐸 , 𝑘𝑒𝑦𝑠𝑘
𝐸 ), (𝑘𝑒𝑦𝑝𝑘
ℎ , 𝑘𝑒𝑦𝑠𝑘
ℎ ) ⊳ Public-private keypairs generation
4:  𝛿ℎ𝑖,ℎ𝑗 ∶= 𝛿(𝜃∗
𝑖 , 𝜃∗
𝑗 ) ∶=
(𝜃∗
𝑖 ,𝜃∗
𝑗 )
‖‖‖𝜃∗
𝑖
‖‖‖
‖‖‖𝜃∗
𝑗
‖‖‖
5:  𝐶𝑖, 𝐶𝑗 ← arg min𝐶𝑖∪𝐶𝑗 (max 𝛿𝐶𝑖,𝐶𝑗 ) ⊳ Distribute the users into clusters
6:  for each round 𝑡 = 1,2, ..., T do
7:  for each hospital 𝑖 ∈ ℎ𝑖 in parallel do
8:  𝐸𝑛𝑐 _𝐻𝐸 (𝜓 𝑡
ℎ) ← UserUpdate(𝑖, 𝜓𝑡)
9:  𝜓 𝑡
𝑔𝑏𝑙 = ∑𝐻
ℎ=1
𝑛ℎ
𝑁 𝐸𝑛𝑐 _𝐻𝐸 (𝜓 𝑡
ℎ) ⊳ Global model aggregation with HE
10:  end for
11:  end for
12: end procedure
13: procedure UserUpdate:(𝑖, 𝜓𝑡)
14:  𝐸𝑛𝑐 _𝐻𝐸 (𝜓 𝑡
ℎ) ← 𝜓 𝑡 ⊳ Executes on hospital 𝑖
15:  for each local epoch 𝑗 from 1 to 𝐸𝑝 do
16:  for each batch 𝑏 = {𝑥, 𝑦} of 𝐷𝑖 do
17:  𝜓 𝑡
ℎ = 𝜓 𝑡 − 𝜂ℎ▽𝐹ℎ(𝜓); ⊳ Local model training
18:  𝐹ℎ(𝜓) = 1
𝑛ℎ
∑
𝑥𝑖∈𝐷𝑖 𝑓𝑖(𝜓)
19:  𝐸𝑛𝑐 _𝐻𝐸 (𝜓 𝑡
ℎ) = 𝐸𝑛𝑐 (𝜓 𝑡
ℎ, 𝑘𝑒𝑦𝑝𝑘
ℎ ) ⊳ Encrypt the trained local models
20:  end for
21:  end for
22:  return 𝐸𝑛𝑐 _𝐻𝐸 (𝜓 𝑡
ℎ) for aggregation
23: end procedure
24: procedure IncentiveUser(𝑅𝑡
ℎ)
25:  𝐸𝑖 collects the list of participating hospitals
26:  ℎ1, ℎ2, ..., ℎ𝑛
27:  for ℎ1, ℎ2, ..., ℎ𝑛; 𝐸𝑖 do
28:  𝐸𝑖 ← ConfirmTransaction
29:  ℎ𝑎𝑠ℎ(𝜓 𝑡
ℎ1
, 𝜓𝑡
ℎ2
, ⋯ , 𝜓𝑡
ℎ𝑛)
30:  𝐼𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 → 𝑅𝑡
ℎ = 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑏𝑢𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 ⋅ 𝜓 𝑡
𝑔𝑏𝑙 ⊳ Contribution calculation
31:  𝑅𝑡
ℎ are distributed to ℎ1, ℎ2, ..., ℎ𝑛
32:  end for
33: end procedure
4.2.4. Contribution calculation
Here, hospitals are incentivized through the use of blockchain-based smart contracts, which reward them for meeting the trans-
action requirements of the system model. The blockchain keeps track of the list of participating hospitals 𝐻 = {ℎ1, ℎ2, ℎ3, … , ℎ𝑛} that 
contribute to generating the global model 𝜓 𝑡
𝑔𝑏𝑙 , verifies their transactions stored in blockchain-based edge servers ℎ𝑎𝑠ℎ{𝐸𝑛𝑐 _𝐻𝐸 (𝜓 𝑡
ℎ1
),
𝐸𝑛𝑐 _𝐻𝐸 (𝜓 𝑡
ℎ2
), … , 𝐸𝑛𝑐_𝐻𝐸 (𝜓 𝑡
ℎ𝑛)}, and calculates rewards based on their contribution to 𝜓 𝑡
𝑔𝑏𝑙 according to the below equation: 
𝐼𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 → 𝑅𝑡
ℎ = 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑏𝑢𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 ⋅ 𝜓 𝑡
𝑔𝑏𝑙 (10)
The iterations continue until the model either reaches a specified level of accuracy or exceeds a predetermined number of 
iterations. The detailed procedures of the proposed scheme can be found in Algorithm 1.
4.3. Security analysis
4.3.1. Eliminating centralized authority approach
Blockchain minimizes or replaces the role of a central server, removing a single point of failure and reducing vulnerability 
to attacks. In our framework, we utilize a consortium blockchain, where a group of pre-selected entities (i.e., edge servers) 
collaboratively manages the network, ensuring decentralized control while maintaining efficiency and accountability. Additionally, 
we employ a cross-silo FL setting, where decentralized data owners (i.e., hospitals) collaboratively train ML models without sharing 
raw data. Integrating blockchain into FL further decentralizes the process by securely recording model updates and ensuring 
consensus among participants, thus eliminating reliance on a central coordinator and reducing the risk of manipulation or tampering. 
This approach enables secure, privacy-preserving data collaboration across healthcare institutions.
Internet of Things 31 (2025) 101579 
8 

===== PAGE 9 =====
M. Firdaus et al.
Table 2
Simulation parameters settings.
 Parameter Specification  
 Processor Intel® Core™ i7-7700 8 CPU @ 3.60 GHz  
 Memory 16 GB DDR4 RAM  
 ML library Keras 2.15.0, TensorFlow 2.15.0, Scikit-learn 1.4.2  
 Extension library Numpy 1.19.5, Pandas 1.3.3  
 HE library Microsoft SEAL - Pyfhel 2.3.1  
 Programming language Python 3.8.19  
 Blockchain environment Ganache Truffle GUI 2.4.0  
 Dataset COVID-19 radiography [44] and brain tumor MRI [45] 
 ML model Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)  
4.3.2. Secure computation and mitigation of inference attacks
HE allows computations on encrypted data without revealing the underlying plaintext, ensuring that patient data remains private 
throughout the model training and aggregation process. Furthermore, after local training, model updates or gradients are encrypted 
to minimize the risk of leaking sensitive information during collaborative learning, ensuring that only users with the corresponding 
secret key can decrypt the model. This preventive measure ensures that shared model updates cannot be reconstructed or exploited.
4.3.3. Reliable data security and integrity management
In the FL framework, data owners (i.e., hospitals) maintain full control over their sensitive data by storing it locally. Instead of 
sharing raw data, only model updates are uploaded to the blockchain network, ensuring that the data itself remains private and 
secure. To prevent dishonest hospitals from sharing invalid or corrupted data, all transactions are verified by the distributed edge 
nodes based on the prediction accuracy assessment. Thus, only the verified model updates are processed for global aggregation.
4.3.4. Auditable and transparent collaborative learning
Blockchain records all transactions (e.g., model updates and rewards) in an immutable distributed ledger. By using smart 
contracts, blockchain incentivizes healthcare institutions to actively participate in FL training. Rewards are distributed based on 
contributions to the global model, promoting fairness and collaboration. Furthermore, the decentralized incentive mechanism 
discourages dishonest behavior, as rewards are tied to verifiable contributions recorded on the blockchain.
5. Numerical results and discussion
5.1. Dataset preparation
In our experimental evaluation, we used public datasets for COVID-19 radiography and brain tumor Magnetic Resonance Imaging 
(MRI), referencing the work of [44,45], respectively. We selected these datasets to represent use cases that require collaborative 
handling, such as pandemic diseases and critical conditions needing immediate treatment. The COVID-19 radiography database 
was chosen for its relevance to the COVID-19 pandemic, where early and reliable detection is crucial for controlling the virus’s 
spread and ensuring timely treatment. This dataset includes X-ray images of COVID-19 positive cases, normal lungs, and other 
lung infections like viral pneumonia and lung opacity (non-COVID lung infection). It has expanded to 3616 COVID-19 positive 
X-ray images, along with thousands of normal and lung infection cases. In our study, we focused on two categories, normal and 
COVID, specifically concentrating on the COVID-19 detection process to achieve our design objectives. On the other hand, the brain 
tumor MRI dataset used in this study consists of 7023 high-quality MRI scans of the human brain, categorized into four distinct 
classes: glioma, meningioma, pituitary tumor, and no tumor. This dataset provides comprehensive imaging data for both healthy 
and tumor-affected brains. In our work, we focused on two categories, no tumor and meningioma, aiming to develop and evaluate 
ML models for accurate tumor detection and classification, as well as to enhance treatment planning in the medical field. Fig.  3 
illustrates the samples of dataset for COVID-19 X-ray image [44] and brain tumor MRI [45].
5.2. Evaluation setup
To implement our proposed scheme, we divided the process into two scenarios: HE-based FL for secure healthcare data sharing 
and blockchain-based FL to enable decentralized collaborative training. The Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) model was chosen 
for its effectiveness in image recognition, particularly in training models for COVID-19 and brain tumor MRI data, which are 
essential for medical imaging tasks. Fig.  4 provides an overview of the CNN architecture, which includes six convolutional layers, 
six MaxPooling layers, two fully connected layers, and a Softmax layer. A total of 352 kernel filters are used across the convolution 
layers. The first Conv2D layer has 32 filters of size 3 × 3, followed by a MaxPooling layer with a pool size of 2 × 2. The following 
layers use 32, 32, 64, 64, and 128 filters of size 3 × 3, each followed by MaxPooling layers with a 2 × 2 pool size. Then, two 
fully connected layers with 128 and 64 hidden units lead to the final Softmax output layer, producing two outcomes: ‘‘normal’’ and 
‘‘COVID’’ for COVID-19 X-ray images, as well as ‘‘no tumor’’ and ‘‘meningioma’’ for brain tumor MRI data.
Internet of Things 31 (2025) 101579 
9 

===== PAGE 10 =====
M. Firdaus et al.
Fig. 3. The COVID-19 X-ray image [44] and brain tumor MRI [45] dataset samples: (a) COVID-19 negative X-ray image; (b) COVID-19 negative X-ray image; 
(c) Human brain MRI with no tumor; (d) Human brain MRI with meningioma.
The experiments were conducted using Python 3.8.19, leveraging the ML libraries Keras 2.15.0 and TensorFlow 2.15.0 for 
building and training the CNN models. Scikit-learn 1.4.2 was employed for additional ML functionalities, including model evaluation 
and metrics computation. Data manipulation and numerical operations were handled using Numpy 1.19.5 and Pandas 1.3.3, which 
facilitated efficient data preprocessing and analysis. For secure computation, particularly in the context of homomorphic encryption, 
we integrated Microsoft SEAL with Pyfhel 2.3.1, allowing for privacy-preserving model training and evaluation. Microsoft SEAL [46] 
is a homomorphic encryption library developed by Microsoft and released in 2015. Complementing this, Pyfhel [47] provides a 
user-friendly interface while maintaining access to the core functionalities of FHE. As a Python wrapper for Microsoft SEAL, Pyfhel 
features a layered architecture that facilitates access to homomorphic operations, key management, context parameters, ciphertexts, 
and serialization capabilities.
On the other hand, we deployed the Ganache Truffle GUI to create a local blockchain environment for deploying Ethereum smart 
contracts and transparently evaluating users’ contributions. We used the default settings, operating on an RPC server in auto-mining 
mode, which included a gas price of 20,000,000,000 wei and a gas limit of 6,721,975 units. User addresses were generated through 
Ganache, with each address holding 100.00 ETH and being publicly accessible. The experiments and evaluations were conducted 
on a computer with an Intel® Core™ i7-7700 processor, featuring 8 CPUs at 3.60 GHz and 8 GB of RAM. The environment settings 
and specifications can be seen in Table  2, and the code is publicly available on GitHub.1
1 https://github.com/blockchainflhe/Blockchain-based-Federated-Learning-with-Homomorphic-Encryption.
Internet of Things 31 (2025) 101579 
10 

===== PAGE 11 =====
M. Firdaus et al.
Fig. 4. The proposed CNN model architecture.
Fig. 5. The best performance of proposed model.
Table 3
The configuration of the training and testing datasets.
 Configuration COVID-19 datasets Brain tumor datasets  
 𝑆𝑐ℎ𝑒𝑚𝑒 1 𝐷𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛 = 100, 𝐷𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑡 = 30 𝐷𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛 = 100, 𝐷𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑡 = 30  
 𝑆𝑐ℎ𝑒𝑚𝑒 2 𝐷𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛 = 400, 𝐷𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑡 = 100 𝐷𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛 = 400, 𝐷𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑡 = 100 
 𝑆𝑐ℎ𝑒𝑚𝑒 3 𝐷𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛 = 800, 𝐷𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑡 = 200 𝐷𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛 = 800, 𝐷𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑡 = 200 
5.3. Experiment results
We started by selecting 1000 records from the original dataset for both COVID-19 and brain tumor MRI data, dividing them 
into 800 records for training and 200 for testing. We configured several parameters, including the number of epochs, batch size, 
and learning rate, set to 32, 10, and 0.001, respectively. Various metrics, including precision, recall, F1-score, and accuracy, were 
used to evaluate the system’s performance. This simulation observed a procedure similar to that outlined in [16], aligning with our 
approach. Fig.  5 presents the best performance of our proposed model for detecting COVID-19 and brain tumors. For the COVID-19 
dataset, the model achieved precision, recall, F1 score, and accuracy values of 0.9735, 0.9725, 0.9725, and 0.9725, respectively. 
Meanwhile, for the brain tumor dataset, the model achieved precision, recall, F1 score, and accuracy values of 0.8837, 0.8625, 
Internet of Things 31 (2025) 101579 
11 

===== PAGE 12 =====
M. Firdaus et al.
Fig. 6. The accuracy results from the varying data distributions across hospitals.
Fig. 7. The total time for model encryption and decryption.
0.8606, and 0.8625, respectively. We then varied the data distribution among hospitals to observe its impact on the accuracy of the 
local model updates. The configuration of the training and testing datasets is shown in Table  3. Fig.  6 illustrates the accuracy results 
obtained from varying data distributions across hospitals over 10 epochs. In this evaluation, 𝑆𝑐ℎ𝑒𝑚𝑒 1, which used the brain tumor 
dataset, produced the lowest accuracy, while 𝑆𝑐ℎ𝑒𝑚𝑒 3, utilizing the COVID-19 dataset, achieved the highest accuracy for the local 
model updates. In this sense, hospitals with larger datasets tend to achieve higher accuracy in local training. Conversely, hospitals 
with smaller datasets typically experience lower accuracy.
After local training, hospitals encrypt the local model updates using homomorphic encryption before uploading it to edge servers, 
and they decrypt the global model before the local training process begins. Fig.  7 shows the total time hospitals spend encrypting and 
decrypting the global model during collaborative training. As depicted in the figure, the decryption process is faster than encryption 
due to simpler operations involved, such as reversing encryption transformations or applying straightforward algorithms to retrieve 
the original plaintext [48]. On the other hand, Fig.  8 shows the overall execution times across clusters with different levels of data 
distribution. We configured five clusters: 𝐶1 and 𝐶2 exhibit almost homogeneous data distribution, whereas 𝐶4 and 𝐶5 show more 
heterogeneous data distribution, with 𝐶3 positioned in the middle. As predicted, the execution time in 𝐶5 is higher than in other 
clusters, especially 𝐶1. In clusters with more heterogeneous data, such as C4 and C5, the variability between data points increases, 
causing the local models to diverge more from each other. This divergence leads to poor convergence and longer processing times 
during model training and aggregation. Consequently, the execution time in C5, with the most heterogeneous data, is higher than in 
other clusters, particularly compared to C1, which has more homogeneous data. Homogeneous data clusters converge more quickly, 
leading to shorter execution times.
We continued our observation by varying the number of hospitals in each cluster: 𝐶1 with 2 hospitals, 𝐶2 with 3 hospitals, 
𝐶3 with 4 hospitals, and 𝐶4 with 5 hospitals. We performed the evaluation on both the COVID-19 and brain tumor datasets 
Internet of Things 31 (2025) 101579 
12 

===== PAGE 13 =====
M. Firdaus et al.
Fig. 8. Execution time in seconds with the various data distribution level.
Table 4
The results of system performance.
 Cluster Dataset Precision Recall F1 Score Accuracy 
 𝐶1 → 𝐻 = 2 COVID-19 0.86511 0.83750 0.83436 0.83750  
 𝐶2 → 𝐻 = 3 COVID-19 0.87212 0.84500 0.84212 0.84500  
 𝐶3 → 𝐻 = 4 COVID-19 0.90724 0.90000 0.89955 0.90000  
 𝐶4 → 𝐻 = 5 COVID-19 0.93859 0.93000 0.92965 0.93000  
 𝐶1 → 𝐻 = 2 Brain tumor 0.82608 0.73333 0.71292 0.73333  
 𝐶2 → 𝐻 = 3 Brain tumor 0.81127 0.76750 0.75902 0.76750  
 𝐶3 → 𝐻 = 4 Brain tumor 0.87537 0.85000 0.84742 0.85000  
 𝐶4 → 𝐻 = 5 Brain tumor 0.88368 0.86250 0.86057 0.86250  
Table 5
The results of system computation time.
 Cluster (COVID 19) Total encryption time (s) Aggregation time (s) Total execution time (s) 
 𝐶1 → 𝐻 = 2 599.83940 119.42638 1330.64357  
 𝐶2 → 𝐻 = 3 899.26339 186.61607 1629.75875  
 𝐶3 → 𝐻 = 4 1160.82893 230.19174 1960.49950  
 𝐶4 → 𝐻 = 5 1655.71437 269.49947 2511.15039  
Table 6
The effect of 𝑞 and 𝑚 to computation time.
 Parameters Total encryption time (s) Aggregation time (s) Total execution time (s) 
 𝑞 = 128, 𝑚 = 1024 1655.71437 269.49947 2122.81493  
 𝑞 = 192, 𝑚 = 1024 1660.53336 277.79007 2577.25304  
 𝑞 = 128, 𝑚 = 2048 2282.26301 895.55570 4025.69411  
 𝑞 = 192, 𝑚 = 2048 3079.10102 1207.83221 5929.70427  
using homogeneous data distributions. Table  4 summarizes the results of system performance, where 𝐶5 with COVID-19 dataset 
outperforms other clusters in every performance parameter: precision of 0.93859, recall of 0.93000, F1 score of 0.92965, and 
accuracy of 0.93000. In contrast, 𝐶1 with brain tumor dataset achieves lower performance metrics: precision of 0.82608, recall 
of 0.73333, F1 score of 0.71292, and accuracy of 0.73333. Moreover, Table  5 depicts the results of system computation time 
among clusters. In this setting, we use the COVID-19 dataset with 𝑆𝑐ℎ𝑒𝑚𝑒 3 in Table  3. The results indicate that an increase in 
the number of participating hospitals leads to a proportional increase in system computation time. Additionally, we also adjusted 
two hyperparameters in the homomorphic encryption environment: the ciphertext modulus (𝑞) and the polynomial modulus (𝑚). 𝑞
controls how much noise can accumulate before decryption fails [47], while 𝑚 is associated with the complexity of the encryption 
scheme [46]. In our simulation, the value of 𝑞 is set to 128 and 192, while the value of 𝑚 is set to 1024 and 2048. Table  6 presents 
the effect of 𝑞 and 𝑚 to computation time. As a result, when 𝑞 = 128 and 𝑚 = 1024, the overall computation time is lower compared 
to other settings. In contrast, when 𝑞 = 192 and 𝑚 = 2048 , the computation time is the highest. This indicates that larger values of 
𝑞 and 𝑚 lead to increased ciphertext sizes and longer computation times.
Internet of Things 31 (2025) 101579 
13 

===== PAGE 14 =====
M. Firdaus et al.
Fig. 9. The total number of transactions generated in the blockchain network.
Fig. 10. The users’ contribution results.
Fig. 11. Performance comparison with the existing works.
Internet of Things 31 (2025) 101579 
14 

===== PAGE 15 =====
M. Firdaus et al.
Once hospitals upload their local model updates to the cluster edge servers, these updates are recorded as transactions on the 
blockchain network. Fig.  9 illustrates the total number of transactions generated in the blockchain network across various epochs 
(𝐸𝑝). 𝐸𝑝2 recorded 149 transactions, 𝐸𝑝4 generated 290, 𝐸𝑝6 reached 434, and 𝐸𝑝8 and 𝐸𝑝10 generated 578 and 722 transactions, 
respectively. On the other hand, Fig.  10 demonstrates how users’ contributions are distributed to build the FL global model using 
the Ethereum platform. Five collaborative entities (hospitals) have been established to develop a robust framework for sharing 
healthcare data. This process entails gathering and integrating models from different hospitals within the proposed framework and 
storing them on a decentralized ledger blockchain. Following this, hospitals receive rewards based on their documented contributions 
to the blockchain’s distributed ledger when a new global model is generated.
Lastly, we compare our proposed model with recent studies [16,35]. As shown in Fig.  11, the results indicate that our model 
outperforms the approach presented in [16] for the COVID-19 dataset and demonstrates superior performance compared to the 
work suggested in [35] for the brain tumor dataset. Our framework outperforms both studies in all key performance metrics, 
including precision, recall, F1-score, and accuracy. For example, in the COVID-19 dataset, the accuracy achieved by [16] is 0.8300, 
while our proposed framework achieves an accuracy of 0.9725. Similarly, for the brain tumor dataset, [35] achieves an accuracy 
of 0.8331, while our framework performs better with an accuracy of 0.8625. In summary, while both [16,35] focus on securing 
the FL process using homomorphic encryption, our proposed framework goes a step further by integrating blockchain technology, 
which strengthens data security, decentralization, and incentivizes collaboration. In our framework, we enhance security and privacy 
through both blockchain and homomorphic encryption, which not only secures the model but also ensures transparency and trust 
among collaborating healthcare institutions. This dual-layered security approach in our framework allows for more robust protection 
of data and model integrity, supporting a more collaborative and secure environment for model training, ultimately leading to more 
accurate predictions and improved overall performance.
6. Conclusion
This paper presents a secure approach to Federated Learning (FL) that utilizes homomorphic encryption and blockchain to 
address security and privacy concerns within the healthcare system. Our approach adopts a cross-silo FL framework suitable for 
healthcare applications. Blockchain technology ensures integrity and transparency by recording all transactions on a distributed 
ledger. Additionally, blockchain facilitates a decentralized incentive system design to encourage participation in collaborative 
training across healthcare institutions. Homomorphic encryption safeguards sensitive medical information during collaborative FL 
model training and aggregation, enabling computations on encrypted data without decryption, thereby ensuring privacy and security. 
Numerical results demonstrate that our scheme aids healthcare privacy protection and achieves intended design objectives with 
decent accuracy. However, future research should focus on critical areas such as the impact of heterogeneous data distribution 
among hospitals, which challenges model personalization and convergence. Moreover, developing robust defense strategies against 
potential FL vulnerabilities and attacks is crucial to ensure the security and integrity of FL systems.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Muhammad Firdaus: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, Software, Methodology, 
Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Harashta Tatimma Larasati: Writing – review & editing, Writing 
– original draft, Validation. Kyung Hyune-Rhee: Supervision, Resources, Project administration, Funding acquisition.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgments
This research was supported as a ‘Technology Commercialization Collaboration Platform Construction, Republic of Korea’ project 
of the INNOPOLIS FOUNDATION (Project Number: 1711202494). This study also was conducted with the support of RealSecu Small 
and Medium Business Technology Innovation Development (R&D), Republic of Korea project ‘AI, Security Solution to Block the 
Leakage of Internal Confidential Information through Machine Learning’ (RS-2024-00514290).
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
Internet of Things 31 (2025) 101579 
15 

===== PAGE 16 =====
M. Firdaus et al.
References
[1] J. Xu, B.S. Glicksberg, C. Su, P. Walker, J. Bian, F. Wang, Federated learning for healthcare informatics, J. Heal. Inform. Res. 5 (2021) 1–19.
[2] G.J. Annas, HIPAA regulations: A new era of medical-record privacy? N. Engl. J. Med. 348 (2003) 1486.
[3] R.S. Antunes, C. André da Costa, A. Küderle, I.A. Yari, B. Eskofier, Federated learning for healthcare: Systematic review and architecture proposal, ACM 
Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol. (TIST) 13 (4) (2022) 1–23.
[4] M. Joshi, A. Pal, M. Sankarasubbu, Federated learning for healthcare domain-pipeline, applications and challenges, ACM Trans. Comput. Heal. 3 (4) (2022) 
1–36.
[5] H. Li, C. Li, J. Wang, A. Yang, Z. Ma, Z. Zhang, D. Hua, Review on security of federated learning and its application in healthcare, Future Gener. Comput. 
Syst. 144 (2023) 271–290.
[6] K. Bonawitz, V. Ivanov, B. Kreuter, A. Marcedone, H.B. McMahan, S. Patel, D. Ramage, A. Segal, K. Seth, Practical secure aggregation for privacy-preserving 
machine learning, in: Proceedings of the 2017 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security, 2017, pp. 1175–1191.
[7] K. Wei, J. Li, M. Ding, C. Ma, H.H. Yang, F. Farokhi, S. Jin, T.Q. Quek, H.V. Poor, Federated learning with differential privacy: Algorithms and performance 
analysis, IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur. 15 (2020) 3454–3469.
[8] Y. Aono, T. Hayashi, L. Wang, S. Moriai, et al., Privacy-preserving deep learning via additively homomorphic encryption, IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur. 
13 (5) (2017) 1333–1345.
[9] C. Zhang, Y. Xie, H. Bai, B. Yu, W. Li, Y. Gao, A survey on federated learning, Knowl.-Based Syst. 216 (2021) 106775.
[10] M. Azarm-Daigle, C. Kuziemsky, L. Peyton, A review of cross organizational healthcare data sharing, Procedia Comput. Sci. 63 (2015) 425–432.
[11] L.B. Elvas, J.C. Ferreira, M.S. Dias, L.B. Rosário, Health data sharing towards knowledge creation, Systems 11 (8) (2023) 435.
[12] J. Scheibner, J.L. Raisaro, J.R. Troncoso-Pastoriza, M. Ienca, J. Fellay, E. Vayena, J.-P. Hubaux, Revolutionizing medical data sharing using advanced 
privacy-enhancing technologies: Technical, legal, and ethical synthesis, J. Med. Internet Res. 23 (2) (2021) e25120.
[13] K. El Emam, E. Jonker, L. Arbuckle, B. Malin, A systematic review of re-identification attacks on health data, PloS One 6 (12) (2011) e28071.
[14] K. El Emam, L. Arbuckle, G. Koru, B. Eze, L. Gaudette, E. Neri, S. Rose, J. Howard, J. Gluck, De-identification methods for open health data: The case 
of the heritage health prize claims dataset, J. Med. Internet Res. 14 (1) (2012) e33.
[15] K. Benitez, B. Malin, Evaluating re-identification risks with respect to the HIPAA privacy rule, J. Am. Med. Inform. Assoc. 17 (2) (2010) 169–177.
[16] F. Wibawa, F.O. Catak, M. Kuzlu, S. Sarp, U. Cali, Homomorphic encryption and federated learning based privacy-preserving cnn training: Covid-19 
detection use-case, in: Proceedings of the 2022 European Interdisciplinary Cybersecurity Conference, 2022, pp. 85–90.
[17] N.M. Hijazi, M. Aloqaily, M. Guizani, B. Ouni, F. Karray, Secure federated learning with fully homomorphic encryption for iot communications, IEEE 
Internet Things J. (2023).
[18] A. Acar, H. Aksu, A.S. Uluagac, M. Conti, A survey on homomorphic encryption schemes: Theory and implementation, ACM Comput. Surv. (Csur) 51 (4) 
(2018) 1–35.
[19] X. Li, P. Jiang, T. Chen, X. Luo, Q. Wen, A survey on the security of blockchain systems, Future Gener. Comput. Syst. 107 (2020) 841–853.
[20] J. Yli-Huumo, D. Ko, S. Choi, S. Park, K. Smolander, Where is current research on blockchain technology?—A systematic review, PloS One 11 (10) (2016) 
e0163477.
[21] S. Nakamoto, Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system, Decentralized Bus. Rev. (2008).
[22] M. Firdaus, K.-H. Rhee, Towards trustworthy collaborative healthcare data sharing, in: 2023 IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics and 
Biomedicine, BIBM, IEEE, 2023, pp. 4059–4064.
[23] Z. Zheng, S. Xie, H. Dai, X. Chen, H. Wang, An overview of blockchain technology: Architecture, consensus, and future trends, in: 2017 IEEE International 
Congress on Big Data (BigData Congress), Ieee, 2017, pp. 557–564.
[24] M. Szydlo, Merkle tree traversal in log space and time, in: Advances in Cryptology-EUROCRYPT 2004: International Conference on the Theory and 
Applications of Cryptographic Techniques, Interlaken, Switzerland, May 2-6, 2004. Proceedings 23, Springer, 2004, pp. 541–554.
[25] B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, B.A. y Arcas, Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized data, in: Artificial 
Intelligence and Statistics, PMLR, 2017, pp. 1273–1282.
[26] X. Zhu, H. Li, Y. Yu, Blockchain-based privacy preserving deep learning, in: International Conference on Information Security and Cryptology, Springer, 
2018, pp. 370–383.
[27] H.T. Larasati, M. Firdaus, H. Kim, Quantum federated learning: Remarks and challenges, in: 2022 IEEE 9th International Conference on Cyber Security 
and Cloud Computing (CSCloud)/2022 IEEE 8th International Conference on Edge Computing and Scalable Cloud (EdgeCom), IEEE, 2022, pp. 1–5.
[28] A. Hard, K. Rao, R. Mathews, S. Ramaswamy, F. Beaufays, S. Augenstein, H. Eichner, C. Kiddon, D. Ramage, Federated learning for mobile keyboard 
prediction, 2018, arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.03604.
[29] M. Chen, R. Mathews, T. Ouyang, F. Beaufays, Federated learning of out-of-vocabulary words, 2019, arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.10635.
[30] T.S. Brisimi, R. Chen, T. Mela, A. Olshevsky, I.C. Paschalidis, W. Shi, Federated learning of predictive models from federated electronic health records, 
Int. J. Med. Inform. 112 (2018) 59–67.
[31] S. Samarakoon, M. Bennis, W. Saad, M. Debbah, Federated learning for ultra-reliable low-latency V2V communications, in: 2018 IEEE Global 
Communications Conference, GLOBECOM, IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–7.
[32] S. Boughorbel, F. Jarray, N. Venugopal, S. Moosa, H. Elhadi, M. Makhlouf, Federated uncertainty-aware learning for distributed hospital ehr data, 2019, 
arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.12191.
[33] H. Fang, Q. Qian, Privacy preserving machine learning with homomorphic encryption and federated learning, Futur. Internet 13 (4) (2021) 94, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/fi13040094, URL https://www.mdpi.com/1999-5903/13/4/94.
[34] N. Wang, W. Yang, X. Wang, L. Wu, Z. Guan, X. Du, M. Guizani, A blockchain based privacy-preserving federated learning scheme for internet of 
vehicles, Digit. Commun. Netw. 10 (1) (2024) 126–134, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.dcan.2022.05.020, URL https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/
S2352864822001134.
[35] S.A. Rieyan, M.R.K. News, A.M. Rahman, S.A. Khan, S.T.J. Zaarif, M.G.R. Alam, M.M. Hassan, M. Ianni, G. Fortino, An advanced data fabric architecture 
leveraging homomorphic encryption and federated learning, Inf. Fusion 102 (2024) 102004.
[36] K. Zhao, X.A. Wang, B. Yang, Y. Tian, J. Zhang, A privacy preserving homomorphic computing toolkit for predictive computation, Inf. Process. Manage. 
59 (2) (2022) 102880.
[37] D. Huang, Q. Gan, X. Wang, M.R. Ogiela, X.A. Wang, Privacy preserving IoT-based crowd-sensing network with comparable homomorphic encryption and 
its application in combating COVID19, Internet Things 20 (2022) 100625.
[38] Y. Su, X.A. Wang, W. Du, Y. Ge, K. Zhao, M. Lv, A secure data fitting scheme based on CKKS homomorphic encryption for medical IoT, J. High Speed 
Netw. 29 (1) (2023) 41–56.
[39] H. Wang, Z. Kaplan, D. Niu, B. Li, Optimizing federated learning on non-iid data with reinforcement learning, in: IEEE INFOCOM 2020-IEEE Conference 
on Computer Communications, IEEE, 2020, pp. 1698–1707.
[40] R. Yang, T. Zhao, F.R. Yu, M. Li, D. Zhang, X. Zhao, Blockchain-based federated learning with enhanced privacy and security using homomorphic encryption 
and reputation, IEEE Internet Things J. (2024).
Internet of Things 31 (2025) 101579 
16 

===== PAGE 17 =====
M. Firdaus et al.
[41] M. Firdaus, S. Noh, Z. Qian, K.-H. Rhee, BPFL: Blockchain-enabled distributed edge cluster for personalized federated learning, in: International Conference 
on Computer Science and Its Applications and the International Conference on Ubiquitous Information Technologies and Applications, Springer, 2022, pp. 
431–437.
[42] F. Sattler, K.-R. Müller, W. Samek, Clustered federated learning: Model-agnostic distributed multitask optimization under privacy constraints, IEEE Trans. 
Neural Netw. Learn. Syst. 32 (8) (2020) 3710–3722.
[43] Y. Lu, X. Huang, Y. Dai, S. Maharjan, Y. Zhang, Blockchain and federated learning for privacy-preserved data sharing in industrial IoT, IEEE Trans. Ind. 
Inform. 16 (6) (2019) 4177–4186.
[44] T. Rahman, A. Khandakar, Y. Qiblawey, A. Tahir, S. Kiranyaz, S.B.A. Kashem, M.T. Islam, S. Al Maadeed, S.M. Zughaier, M.S. Khan, et al., Exploring the 
effect of image enhancement techniques on COVID-19 detection using chest X-ray images, Comput. Biol. Med. 132 (2021) 104319.
[45] M. Nickparvar, Brain tumor MRI dataset, 2021, http://dx.doi.org/10.34740/KAGGLE/DSV/2645886, URL https://www.kaggle.com/dsv/2645886.
[46] Microsoft SEAL (release 4.1), 2023, https://github.com/Microsoft/SEAL. Microsoft Research, Redmond, WA.
[47] A. Ibarrondo, A. Viand, Pyfhel: Python for homomorphic encryption libraries, in: Proceedings of the 9th on Workshop on Encrypted Computing & Applied 
Homomorphic Cryptography, 2021, pp. 11–16.
[48] M. Naehrig, K. Lauter, V. Vaikuntanathan, Can homomorphic encryption be practical? in: Proceedings of the 3rd ACM Workshop on Cloud Computing 
Security Workshop, 2011, pp. 113–124.
Internet of Things 31 (2025) 101579 
17 